We started working really off the coast of
Southern California, and in 1940 we did make a
cruise as far north as roughly the Columbia River,
and another venture that was in 1939 was a cruise to
the Gulf of California, which we made in the winter
of that year, which was the first time that any
vessel from Scripps had really ventured very far
away from home. And this was really sort of
exploring in those days, because so little was
known.
And I don't know what might have happened if the war
had not intervened, and I think we would have had to
find some larger vessel and that we would have,
presumably within a few years at least, moved out
to operations on sort of an ocean-wide scale.
Actually,
I left scripts in July of 1941, having spent a month
prior to that at Woods Hole to learn something
about the interpretation of bathy thermograph
observations in terms of underwater sound
problems. And on July the 1st, I moved down the Navy
laboratory on Point Loma, not as an employee of the
Navy, but under one of these war research
programs.
was funded later on by the NDRC, the National
Defense Research Committee, I think it was
called. And this was a essentially federally
funded war research program administered
through the University of California. And I
stated in this program at Point Loma until early in
1946.
By that time, the work had been taken over by the
Navy itself, but I still continued, as did many of
the others there, to be actually as employed by the
University of California.
first year or so down there, the work that I was
engaged in was primarily how you might interpret
various physical conditions in the ocean,
primarily temperature and salinity and so on, in
terms of the acoustic conditions in the ocean. We
used to call the echo-ranging problem, and this
gradually gave way to other environmentally
related problems, but I became more and more
involved in the general sort of administration of
some of the basic research going on at the
laboratory on Point Loma. And toward the end, I
actually was an assistant director in charge of
the research, which involved primarily a set of
acoustics of various kinds, but a good many other
types of activities. I have several questions on
that. Now, you go to Woods Hole, though, to work
with the BT for anti-submarine warfare, don't
you? I did go back and work with Robert Montgomery
for about a month, because at that time, as I
indicated earlier, we really didn't know what the
bathy thermograph was measuring and so on, and
also how you might be able to use this kind of
information in these underwater sound problems.
And we were all very naive as to what we were doing,
but I contributed my small part here to the whole
program in that I was the one who suggested they
make photographic copies, and Montgomery and I
worked out the first sort of system for coding
these things and keeping the appropriate records
and so on, which persisted for a good many years
after that. Right. You're looking for ways of
measuring thermal clamps. In effect, yes. There
had been some work done by Columbus Island at Woods
Hole by Morris Ewing and some of the other people
that were associated with them in the preceding
few years. which showed the probable
relationship of temperature and humidity
conditions on underwater sound. And Morris
Ewing's contribution, I think, was particularly
to show that you could use some of the refraction
computations that he was familiar with from his
work in geophysics would be applied to these.
these conditions in the ocean, and of course it was
not directly temperature and salinity that was
involved here, but the distribution of sound
velocity. And so there were, we had the clue as to
what we should be doing, although a lot of the sort
of techniques had not been worked out, and
particularly during the first year or so, much
effort went into devising ways of calculating
these so-called ray diagrams and seeing how you
could in a sense simplify some of the conditions as
you observed in the ocean to compute these sort of
ray diagrams and so on.
Then a lot of effort was spent in the first year or
two of making up what were called sound ranging
charts or sonar charts, which didn't depend just
on the BT. We used every other scrap of information
we could to essentially try and come up with
quantitative approach of the regional
differences in sound ranging conditions that
might be predicted from characteristics of the
ocean waters. Why photography? I'm sorry? Why
photography? What made you think of photography?
I guess because my father was a photographer, and
it seemed to me that the BT slide was like a
negative, and why not put it in a projector and just
make a print from this, which could then be
enlarged too, because the original BT slide you
really had to insert in a a magnifier in order to
read it, we more or less standardized on what was
roughly a postcard size reproduction. All you
have to do is stick them in a regular photographic
enlarging machine and use fairly contrasty
paper.
When you're working, I need to know something else
here, too, right now. Why didn't you go with Revell
to the Navy and to Washington at this time? Why did
you choose Point Loma? Well, here again, there's
some kind of interesting things that, if I
remember correctly, about 1939, there was some
concern about the international situation and so
on. Revell uh had applied for and obtained a
reserve commission as an ensign and i applied too i
think it was somewhat later than that because yes
must be and i have somewhere in my files a letter
that i received from the navy saying that they
regretted they didn't couldn't offer me a
commission because they had no foreseeable need
for oceanographers. So, of course, Revelle went
down to Point Loma at that same time, and I can't
really remember how long he was there, but he was
there for about a year or two before he went back to
Washington. But I had tried that route, but it
didn't work. and
I think that answers it, sure. And then during
those war years, then, you're involved in
research at Point Loma itself. Yes, I would, as I
look back on it now, I did a good deal of
research, particularly in the first year or two,
but really what I became more and more involved in
was what I would consider a science
administration. And things moved very rapidly in
those days, and so there was a great deal of sort of
planning and a good deal of traveling involved in
that under the NDRC, where there were several
centers, work of this kind was going on, and they
served as a sort of coordinating function, and so
we met at what seemed like fairly frequent
intervals for discussions of what we were doing,
what we were finding, what we ought to do, and also
in trying to prepare sort of manuals and documents
of various kinds for the Navy. So this is part of
what I consider is the administrative side. I
wasn't involved too much with actual sort of
budgeting or matters of that kind. What it didn't
involve was us breaking out from the rather narrow
kind of confines of individual research and
getting involved with the programs and
activities of a variety, a relatively large
number of people in fields that I had absolutely no
familiarity with at all. And this, I think, was one
of the effects of the war that it that those of us who
were involved in activities of this kind really
got broken away from what would have been a normal
sort of pattern of
career evolution here, and got thrust into very
large, very complex kind of problems involving
fields which were Originally, at least,
unfamiliar to us. That anticipates, as a matter of
fact, my next question. With whom did you come into
contact in about 1941 to 1943 that sort of moves you
into administrative oceanography here all at
once? Well, Professor Sverdrup was originally
to essentially head up the kind of oceanographic
component at the Point Loma Laboratory. But he
encountered security problems because of having
his family, not his immediate family, but
relatives in Norway and so on, and it was felt that
he was in a sensitive sort of position.
they would not give him security clearance, and I
essentially had to take over what he might have
done, and he returned, and he never really left it
because this was only a part-time sort of activity
down in Point Loma, but he returned full-time to
Scripps, and he and Walter Monk, whom we had
originally had down at Point Loma with us, and who
could not get security clearance. Frederick Monk
took on this study of the wave problem, and I think
it started originally under the Air Force
support, and out of that there's this whole an
amazingly rapid development of understanding of
the problems of wave characteristics, wind wave
characteristics, and methods of predicting wind
wave conditions and swell and surf and so on. And
then out of that activity came the training
program which was sent set up at Scripps, which I
had no direct contact at all, although I was living
within a few miles of it, which brought in a number
of young officers from the Air Force and the Navy
who were trained in these wave forecasting
techniques. And as we were saying this morning,
later on, a number of these young men returned to
Scripps and finished off their doctoral work But
that was really one of the, I think, very dramatic
developments during the war, because prior to the
time that Sverdrup and Munk turned their
attention to this problem, which they had not
really dealt with previously, there was
virtually nothing known about the
characteristics of ocean waves. It was a body of
theory. very little connection between the sort
of theory and the real conditions, and there was
only a very, very limited literature about wave
conditions and wave behavior.
Did you consciously make an effort at about 45 to go
to Washington or to D.C., or did that just happen?
Well, here again, I think that Ravel enters the
story because he had moved from the Navy
Laboratories Point Loma to the Bureau of Ships,
and in particular to the, I think it was called the
Sonar Design Section or something, that name,
under a, can't remember his rank now, but Bennett,
and had the imagination to see the role of and
importance of ocean information to the Navy, and
yet there was no mechanism by which the Navy could
essentially continue the oceanographic studies
and so on. There are a number of sort of related
threads to the story which are involved in this
thing, and that is that, as I mentioned earlier, at
Woods Hole and at Point Loma we prepared, for
example, these sonar charts and so on. They were
actually published through the Hydrographic
Office, and so that during the war they had set up in
the Hydrographic Office an oceanographic unit, I
believe it was called at that time, and this was
under the direction of Mary Sears, who was being
commissioned as a wave, and they served during the
war as a, as essentially a publications outlet for
for some of the material being prepared under
these war research laboratory programs, and they
did some compilation of various kinds of
information, but this was a temporary sort of
situation, and one of the things that Revelle and
others were able to accomplish was to have the Navy
Department set up on a more, on a continuing basis,
the an oceanographic section in what was then the
Hydrographic Office, and I was essentially
offered the position, and it looked extremely
interesting and important to me at that time to go
back and start what was known when I arrived as the
Division of Oceanography in the Hydrographic
Office. Of course, the whole thing later became
the Oceanographic Office, but it was a division.
Shortly
after I arrived in April of 1946, the
oceanographic unit that had been in existence was
being phased out, and the new division reached a
low ebb of one girl who helped me and myself. I left
about five years later with over 200 people in the
division and operating two sort of what were at
that time very large oceanographic vessels for
the Hydrographic Office. So this was a, yes, a
challenging sort of thing. I felt that there were
urgent needs for, to keep a sort of a national
program going rather than letting things die as
they might have at the end of the war. And
I think this was turned out to be quite correct.
What sort of people did you look for when you went to
establish this office? Did you already have some
people in mind whom you wished to bring to
Washington? Well, only a few people that I'd known
for one reason or another and seemed desirable and
seemed appropriate for the job. And the people
that really were brought in as to be my principal
assistants were Clifford Barnes, who you'll
probably talk to next week. but he only spent a
relatively short time with us and then returned to
the University of Washington. John Lyman, who you
may have encountered, who had been in the Navy all
during the war as a reserve officer and had been at
Scripps before that. Thomas Austin, who is now
head of the National Data Center, and another
young man who had been at the WAVE program at
Scripps during the war, Charles Bates, who's now
chief scientist for the Coast Guard. So those were
the, in a sense, senior people who came in early in
the game, but what was,
I think interesting looking back that far, which
is just over 30 years ago, that at that time there
was no classification in the civil service for
anybody called an oceanographer. So one of my
first sort of jobs back there was to set up the job
descriptions for oceanographers, get them
approved by the the Civil Service Commission and
then began to try and recruit some people. And I
very soon found that there weren't very many
people to be recruited. And as any administrator,
I abhor as a job vacancy why we were in the position
of having to hire people with degrees in physics or
chemistry or geology and so on. with essentially
no experience whatsoever in oceanographic
problems. And I soon realized, as I'd learned
during the war, that there was a real need for some
kind of program to train people or educate people
in the field. And so, as I sometimes remark, I
decided to get out of the hiring business and get
into the manufacturing business. to come to the
University of Washington looked attractive to
me. Not only was it sort of intellectually
attractive, but I thought there was a very real
sort of need here. Now, there was some graduate
programs available in the early years following
the war, but One of the things that really
stimulated me into coming to the University of
Washington was the opportunity to set up an
undergraduate program in oceanography, which
had never been attempted before. You know, I want
to return
I have several questions, though, right here
concerning your activities in D.C. itself rather
than Washington State. Was there much conflict
between these civilian oceanographers and Navy
personnel when you began to establish this
office? Well, I wouldn't say there was any
conflict. We were looked on as screwballs by the
establishment within the Hydrographic Office.
They didn't know quite what we were or who we were or
anything else. And... So we were allowed really a
considerable amount of sort of freedom simply
because they had no prior experience in this area.
And this
period, and I can't identify it specifically by
year, but the military budgets were being cut back
very severely in the late 40s, and along with them
the Hydrographic Office was being cut back by
major
amounts, and yet the oceanographic program
continued to grow. This, of course, was looked on
with some sort of favor and encouragement here,
but I think they realized that there was something
to be done here. Now, the people who are sort of
particularly important
encouraging and supporting the growth of the
Oceanographic Program were not so much within the
office itself, but in the Office of the Chief of
Naval Operations, people concerned with
anti-submarine warfare and pro-submarine
warfare and so on, the operating forces. And it was
largely through their interest that we got the
support and opportunities we did. What about ONR?
Well, ONR, I have to stop and think here again. That
got started when, about 46? 46. It was not really
called ONR then, but Revell begins to think about
ONR in 46. Yes, it was the Office of, what was it
called? Something rather off, OR? Something and
Inventions. Yeah, right, it's a strange title.
Yes, and it must have got established about that
time, and Revelle then moved from the
Bureau of Ships to the newly established Of
course, the establishment of ONR was, in a sense, a
response to the phasing out of the wartime
research activities under NDRC and the parent
organization, which was OSRD, Office of
Scientific Research and Development, I guess it
was. So the Navy was, in a sense, trying to find some
mechanism to keep some of their programs going. We
worked very sort of closely together, although I
cannot remember that there were ever any sort of
transfer of funds or anything, as one might have
anticipated in more recent times. But I actually
spent almost a year of it. It must have been about
1949, 50. I spent the better part of a year actually
in ONR on loan, in a sense, from the Hydrographic
Office to work on planning and so forth as related
to anti-submarine problems. And so there was a
good, I think, there was no conflict there. Now you
ran into some sort of difficulties that you'd
almost anticipate anywhere. But I had really very
good rapport, I think, with the people in the
hydrographic offices. CNO and ONR and Bureau of
Ships and so on. So, no, I don't feel there was any
antagonism.
Certainly there was a difference in perspectives
on a lot of the problems. I went back to Washington
with the idea that we ought to be doing a lot of work
on the Arctic, and this had seemed to me a good sort
of subject in which we knew very little and that we
ought to be doing some work up there, and here's
where we got into
lack of appreciation on the part of the
particularly CNO, who informed me and my boss, the
hydrographer, in no uncertain terms that the Navy
had no plans to operate in the Arctic and therefore
had no reason to want to spend any money trying to
find out about it. One of the things I was able to do,
in part with assistance from ONR and some others,
was to, in effect, bootleg some, get some work
started in the Arctic.